Paper review example by Santina Lin for STAT540

[A method to assist in the diagnosis of early diabetic retinopathy: Image processing applied to detection of microaneurysms in fundus images](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26245720) - September 2015

# Overview 
More than three-quarter of diabetic patients has diabetic retinopathy (DR) which is characterized by lesion and hemorrhage in the blood vessels in the retina. This ailment, also called microaneurysms (MA), is asymptomatic until at a late stage that leads to an inevitable vision loss. Since the growth of diabetic cases is increasing faster than the growth in the number of ophthalmologists, developing an automatic diagnosis to aid the detection of microaneurysm is thus the focus of this paper. 

This article gives an extensive review of related work on detection of lesions in fundus images, or photos of the back of the eye. They discussed several methods in over a dozen different research works and stated that the sensitivity and specificity of those existing methods are on the low end of an efficient diagnostic tool, further justifying their motivation in this project. The paper then went into details of each image processing step prior to the selection and classification of candidate MA in their algorithm. 

They evaluated the sensitivity and specificity of their method using labelled dataset from the Standard Diabetic Retinopathy Database (DiaRetDB1) and the Retinopathy Online Competition (ROC). They concluded that their method promises a good future in the problem of MA detection for its simple implementation and the need for a less number of features. 

# Method and data

Fundus images were first preprocessed to reduce non-uniform illumination caused by different settings in the way the photos were taken. They then normalized the image grayscale content by translating the means and scaling the standard deviations. The images then go through some image transformation to reduce the background noise and to bring out the vessels and other features. Each feature is encoded as a matrix, in which each row is the coordinates of each pixel inside the feature. They then determine whether a feature is a candidate MA by looking at the shape, which is determined by the first two orthogonal eigenvectors obtained by applying the principal component analysis (PCA) on each matrix. PCA is a logical choice in determining the shape of a feature because the first principal component (PC) identifies the dimension of the greatest variance, which is where the feature stretches the most, and the second one is perpendicular to the first PC. With these two components, we could define a threshold for their ratio and thus, determine the shape. The sensitivity and specificity of the proposed method in the paper were evaluated using the data from DiaRetDB1 and ROC. Sensitivity is defined as number of true positive over the total that is determined to be positive, or the probability that this imagine analysis returns positive given the patients have DR.  Likewise, specificity is the probability that the test returns negative given the patients do not have DR. The paper focuses on achieving high specificity and sensitivity, and these are their two metrics when they compare their methods with other existing methods.

The DiaRetDB1 contains 89 color digital fundus images, each labelled with a specific type of diabetic fundus lesion by ophthalmologists. The ROC dataset contains 100 color digital fundus images, but it's not clear from the paper how this dataset is labelled and whether the resolution differ from the DiaRetBD1 set. The paper made no mention of how the test and training set are divided in measuring the sensitivity and specificity. 

# Comments and critique 
This paper demonstrated an example of an experiment in which data go through multiple processing stages and are encoded in a different format prior to their analysis. The normalization of the image grayscale content is analogous to a global normalization for correcting the batch effect in biological samples. The research group understood that a superior classification algorithm should be simple and require fewer features than the others and that a practical diagnostic tool should be fast and have high sensitivity and specificity. 
However, it is unclear what prior work have prompted them to choose certain image processing methods and how they decide on the parameters and threshold in each step.  There is no mention of a training data and a testing data neither at any image processing step nor at the final evaluation, so it is possible that the group have used all the available dataset and adjust their parameters accordingly to yield the best precision score. Therefore, while their specificity and sensitivity are superior to other methods, their parameters might not be applicable to classify other fundus images due to overfitting. 

It is also possible that the group lacks an understanding of the biology and the feature of an MA. While they showed a great understanding of image processing, they never mentioned how a typical MA looks like in a fundus image. This information should have been the basis for an image detection algorithm. 